[Automatically transcribed. Not edited yet. Contains many errors.]
>> Hello
>> and welcome to the high school weekly podcast. This is so about
Haskell, a purely functional programming language.
I'm your host, Cameron Gara, an engineer here at I.T..
Pro T.V.. And with me today is Taylor
Fausak, one of the engineers on my team and my
boss. Thanks for joining me today, Taylor.
>> Yeah. I'm happy to be here, Cam. And I'm really excited
today because we have a special guest with
us. Sandy McGuire. Thanks for joining us, Sandy.
Thanks for having
>> me, guys. I'm excited to be here.
>> Yeah, this is awesome. So, Sandy, for
people who may not know who you are already.
How would you describe yourself?
>> I write a lot of Haskell.
>> Good.
Yeah.
>> I don't know. You caught me off guard here,
Taylor.
>> Well, then let me say some things that I know about you. So
you're
>> better prepared than I am
>> here. In addition to writing a lot of Haskell, you write a
lot of Haskell content. You've authored two
books thinking with types and algebra driven
design. Uh, neither of which I think are
necessarily like Haskell books, quote unquote.
But they do sort of intersect quite a bit.
>> Yeah, I think that's very fair.
>> And you also author the blog?
Reasonably polymorphic. And you're the
author of the policy. Me by saying that, right?
Yeah. The city library. For what's
that, like, freer effects effects system?
>> Yeah, some sort of weird effect
>> system.
Uh, and more recently, you've been working on
wingman for Haskell, which is a tool for
I would say, program synthesis, maybe.
>> Yeah, that's, uh that's a great description of it.
>> So
>> you're telling me it's not like the apex
weapon? The wingman, you know?
No.
>> No, it's not. I really want to call it copilot, but
that one's turned out to already be used.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. It's called co
>> Pilot. There's, um there's like a NASA
DSL for doing, like, verified
C plus plus programming or something.
>> So I'm not quite the same thing.
>> Not quite the same thing? No, but it's a great name, and I'm
upset. They got it. First.
>> Wingman is good, too. I like that. Thank
you. So maybe let's launch into that. Could you tell us a
little about wingman? What does it do?
>> Sure. Um, so wingman is a plug in
for the Haskell language server and the idea
is It tries to automate away, um,
the whole driven design, um,
philosophy where you say, I don't really know the code I'm writing. I'm going to put it
in a hole. And then the compiler tells you what that whole
has type. It gives you the type of it, and you say Okay,
well, I know this thing has some type, and I sort of
know roughly what type I think it should be. So you
maybe you put an F map in, and then you put it another hole, and
then it says Okay, well, now the whole has changed because you've sort
of synthesize some of the program. Um,
And for a lot of cold code, this turns out to like,
Really, What you're doing is just typing
in the things G.H.C. tells you to type, right?
It's a little silly, right? So I thought, Why not? Why don't we just, like,
automate that right? Why don't we just automate that conversation with the
compiler and see if we can synthesize all sort of the
dumb programs that you would write yourself if you just
follow the holes?
>> Yeah, we do that surprisingly often. Here.
Uh, we haven't been able to get HLS to work
reliably on our code based, unfortunately, but we do
the like, put a type hole in there and then copy paste or just type
in whatever G.H.C. suggests. Um, if there's only one
thing often there are multiple, you know? Then you pick the right one. The one that's probably
not unsafe. Course. Yeah,
>> doesn't do that.
>> The trick is to not have that one in scope, I
think. But yeah, we get an empty a lot
or like, const. Or something like that. Absolutely.
But yeah, it is kind of silly to be doing this copy
pasting, and it sounds like wingman automate some of that.
But also, I got the impression that it does
more than just naively filling in the hole that G.H.C.
suggests. Is that right?
>> Um, yeah. So there's sort of two things there, One of which
is, uh, we have this this, like, proof search going on in the
background. And so it's actually trying to find a good
program, um, by for some
definition of good, right? And that sort of usually, if you
write code, um, you'll you
often if you like, Seiko that a beginner is written the like.
It'll be crazy. And like, the type signature doesn't really correspond to
the definition. And it's sort of hard to put your hand on what
that means. Um, but
so, like a good metric for that is sort of linearity. You want
generally your variables to only be used once,
right? And so that a program where
if you can synthesize a solution that only uses your variables once, that's
usually better than one that uses the multiple times
>> at
>> all. Or not at all, right? Exactly. Which is the
concert? The unsafe course sort of solution. Um, so
that is sort of the interesting
part of it. Um, and then we also have a bunch of,
like, ergonomic things going on. And so,
um, wingman will also do things like case splitting. And so you can say,
um hey, I want you to case split on X, and that
is some weird GT, and it'll, um it will
multiply out every match, so you'll get
multiple definitions of the function for every possible
constructor,
>> right? So that that turns like one type
hole into many potentially right. And then you keep on filling
from
>> there.
>> Cool. And you mentioned
linearity. Uh, don't want to go too far off on a
tangent here, but I'm wondering, is there
with linear types landed in G.H.C. nine? Is there
an opportunity for wingman too? Make use of that
information and say, Okay, I know that this needs to be
used, so therefore, that's going to guide my
synthesis.
>> Uh, that is a good question.
I have not even looked at the linear
stuff, even in the language. So
>> fair enough. Apparently it
>> doesn't. Um but the way it works
is it's using all of the information from G.H.C. itself.
And so, um, presumably G.H.C. Well, tell me
about the multiplicity of my arrows. And then the
trick is just to run the proof search such that such that it
it respects that. So I don't think there would be any challenges there other than
just writing the code. Cool.
>> And I mean, wingman could probably write some of that code for you,
right?
>> Like the more the better gets, the more you use it
in daily dog Fuding. And, um, it's it's
remarkable how, how much? Just
how lovely it is, right? Compared to the bad old
days where I had to write a case statement for myself and go look up all the
constructors, right? Sort of stupid.
How how much work that was. And I didn't realize
because, um, just like the i d e
situation was so bad for Haskell that, um, before
Haskell language server, you just it wasn't worth your time
often to do it right. So it's an
amazing change in the last year. So the
HLs guys are amazing and they are so much.
>> Yeah, like I mentioned, we haven't been able to get it
working reliably with our code base. But many of us
have been working with it in our side projects or whatever, and
everyone that has it working just immediately
falls in love with it. It's amazing.
>> Yeah, it really adds a lot to the
language.
>> Yeah, I know we've been kind of waiting for this to to
come to the ecosystem because we've been kind of
stranded as far as you know, tools
that we have in our cool belt. Um and I
think, uh, HLs really
just, you know, hit a home run more or
less for the usability and
and feature fullness that we need in the high school
community?
>> Absolutely. It's been like day and
night. Just how quickly the tooling situation has changed last
year.
>> Yeah, and it's funny. When we were talking to Matt
Parsons a couple weeks ago, you mentioned that
since Haskell is such a powerful language, you can
kind of get away without having a powerful I d.
But once you also have a
powerful idea, you just kind of like leapfrog your own
productivity. It's
>> great. It's crazy. Yeah.
>> Um, so could you tell us how did you come
to work on wingman and program synthesis? What? Do you do
that?
>> Yeah, that's a That's a great question. Um, I
So maybe two years ago, I I was sort of fed up. I was
living in Ottawa, in Canada, which was an atrocious place and
just sort of missing a lot of the intellectual
community I was looking for. And so I decided I
was just going to run away and live on Haskell is couches
for as long as I could handle.
>> Remember that.
>> Yeah. I made it for about four months of, like,
couchsurfing and meeting all sorts of really amazing people.
Um and one of the people I met was James King, who
had, like, a little tablet. Um, and he was sort of
pitching me on this idea of programming on the
tablet, right? And like, what would you need to do to make
that happen? Um, sort of. The dream I
have is like, one day being able to be out in the park on my
tablet and, like, programming like
productively out in the park without a keyboard without a
monitor without any of that crap. Right?
Um and so that that question sort of got me
thinking about, like, how? How could we find a better interface
for programming that isn't just typing on a
keyboard? Um, at the same time,
I I was talking a lot with the read Mellanox
who has been working on a tactic synthesizer
for Haskell and sort of He does a lot
of things in like, dependent type languages
where, um they have all the sort of this code synthesis
stuff, and he wanted to bring that into
Haskell. And so he had built, like, a bunch of really incredible
libraries, um, that do most
of the work. And so really,
my contribution was taking the idea and
trying to bridge the gap there,
right between the interface and the solution.
Okay. Um, yeah. So that's sort of how I got
started on it was just, um mm.
This, like, sort of being tired of being on a bus and trying
to type, having terrible are for the
week after. You
>> know, um, it's funny you mentioned
different, like using a tablet as sort of a
different programming paradigm. And I've thought a
lot about that as well. I imagine a lot of programmers have of like,
why is it that I have to be sitting here with a full
sized keyboard in order to be productive?
Um, and yeah, it seems like the
interface for a tablet would be wildly different. Or like in
VR or on a phone or really, anywhere but
sitting at a desk with a
>> computer. I think the value of a keyboard is that it
lets you type arbitrary strings, right. But
almost no strings are programs.
Yeah, right. It's sort of ridiculous that we even
use strings to represent these things in the first place,
>> but and a lot of the strings that you end up typing
aren't arbitrary. They come from some other part of your code
base.
>> That's true. Um, even like keywords
should be auto complete herbal and like a lot of keywords you
need in together. So I need
every time I have a case I need the word of exactly. So
why do I have to type that at any given point? There's only,
like, five things you might want to do, right? So
why don't you just give you those options?
>> I like it. And I know a lot of people go down
the route of structured editing as
a solution to this problem of instead of
typing text into an editor, let's have something like,
I think scratches kind of the prototypical example. But
Block based where you pull that case statement out of
some palette and drop it in your program What? How
did you or what kind of led you to program
synthesis versus structured editing?
>> I think structured editing is a good approach.
Um, I didn't know how to do
that.
Um, I guess the other thing is like, even if you are,
even if you have a better interface, like still, why do I have to
code things that have exactly one solution, right?
A huge personal part of the reason I, like
Haskell is the type system is so good at constraining
implementations, right? And so I sort of
look at like, you've done your job. Well, if if there is
exactly one solution to your type, right, that means you've designed
a good program, and then let's just find that
thing.
>> I like that. Yeah, that's good, because
I'm trying to imagine, like, in javascript. What would
program synthesis look like? And it seems like,
Yeah, I don't know. I don't know enough about it.
Yeah, it's not without crazy ai. Yeah,
or maybe with typescript. There might be enough fence there. Yeah, I
don't know. Um actually, we use a plug in
called Tab nine. That doesn't much.
Are you familiar with it?
>> I sort of know it exists. It's sort of like
machine learning.
>> Yeah, it's very I don't know how to describe it.
Maybe, like stochastic where it just looks at the
strings in your code base and figures out how often they
occur. And then when you start typing something, it's like, Oh,
normally when this is before the cursor and you're typing this. This is
what comes after. So it'll suggest that doesn't work well,
pretty well. Yeah, especially for pretty. Wrote stuff
like imports or again. HLS solves imports for you,
But if you are typing one out, it'll be like, this is a typical module name.
Here you go. Mhm.
>> Yeah. Be nice to get the more time
invested in figuring out how to make HLS work in our
>> program, but
>> for the time, use a lot of template. Haskell.
>> We have a little bit. We're using more. We've We've
turned toward using more of the persistent quasi
quota for doing our models. So that's
that's
>> often that that's the big issue.
Um, and if you can sort of separate that into a
different package, I suspect that will solve your problems,
>> but I promise we'll poke around with it. We have some What? I
mean, like everybody. We have a bespoke environment. We got
docker containers and we got all kinds of stuff going on. Of course,
um, but yeah. Can you use tab nine? I think more than I do.
So you may be able to speak to like what it does. What it's good at,
especially in comparison HLS Yeah. I
>> mean, if you're making a sweeping code
change across the entire code basic
and pretty much figure out what you're
trying to type as you just kind of started
So it's been really helpful. Um, you know,
imports is one that is obviously it has a
lot of examples to analyze and say, Hey, this is what we think you're
doing, especially because we have pretty
consistent naming schemes, so it makes it really easy.
Um, and, uh,
you know, when you're writing function definitions, it can
get a little tricky sometimes because it wants you to, like
if you're doing your type signature like the next line it tries to say, Oh,
you're doing your type signature again. You're like, Wait, no, I'm not
actually implemented here, so that can get a little bit of
a little bit annoyance there. But
overall, it's pretty
helpful. Uh, just in the day to day,
you
>> know, I think
>> if we can get some HLs love, then
you know that may the need for that could
go away should be really cool.
>> It's funny because they're kind of similar
solutions to sorry they're
approaching the same problem with radically different solutions.
One is like, very smart. Give me as much information from the compiler and I'll
use it. And the other is like, I don't need to know, even language you're
typing. I'll just guess, And it'll probably work.
It's
>> amazing to me that that works at all.
>> Yeah, it is startling. Um,
yeah, try that out, and I'd be curious to see what you think about
it. Um, but on the topic of program synthesis, I
am aware of a couple earlier attempts with Haskell to
synthesize programs like I think Lambda but can do some stuff. And
there's a package called gin that does something similar.
Is wingman built on top of those are related to them in any way?
>> Not at all. No, I don't know how Lambda, but does it by no Gin,
um, doesn't work particularly well.
>> I've never used it, so I don't I just know it exists. Then
>> we'll do a lot of like, um, like, sort of
const. Stuff. It
doesn't care if it's used. Arguments is just like, here's a
solution. Um, one thing that wingman also does that Jim doesn't
is Ryker Asian And so, jin,
uh, wingman can, like implement
folder for you, for example. And
if it does recur version of guarantees that,
um, is rehearsing something structurally smaller, so it will
terminate.
>> Yeah,
>> Exactly. Um, So, Jin, I think
it's interesting that exists, and sort of it was
inspiring to me just to see that someone had made progress there.
But, um, if you've ever tried to use it
for real, it it falls short quite soon.
Mm.
>> Well, I hadn't tried to use it. I don't think it builds with more recent
G.H.C. s. So that's what prevented me from trying it out.
>> There's there's another thing I've heard of called Magic Haskell,
which is sort of the other way is to says, Here's some
arguments And here's what the output should be. And it tries to synthesize a
function that produces the output from the inputs.
>> Oh, that's cool. So more kind of spec based.
Yeah,
>> exactly. Um, I haven't I haven't looked at it with the
website was down when I tried to run it, but
>> that sounds really cool. I've heard of similar projects.
I think I I'm
trying to remember the name. There was a project in, like scheme or something like
that. I think it's called Barley Man, or
it's been many years since I heard. Anyway, there's some presentation where it's like
you give a test case and it will produce a function
that meets that. And then you had another test case, and it will turn for a
bit and say, Okay, well, I have a new function now, And as you add more
and more test cases, uh, the implementation gets more and
more, you know, don't look behind the curtain type
implementation, but it works. Technically,
at least it gives you the outputs for the inputs, right? Yeah. And
then, um I think for those that type of program
synthesis, uh, property based tests
will give you much more assurance that your implementation
is something more than just a pile of this statements. Like,
if you give me, I'll give you that, which I think ties in
with algebra driven, designed to kind of take a corner
here. Um, that's a good segue. Thank
you. Uh, so,
yeah. Property based tests are, you know, way too
state properties that should hold in your system and then
tested against the implementation and see if it works. And algebra.
Different design is all about coming up with those
properties, right?
>> Yeah, it's, um, the book itself, sort of.
The main thesis of it is that if we're doing
functional program, we should really be thinking about equality of programs,
right? That's sort of what it buys us over imperative stuff.
And, um And so
if you're like designing some a p I it's really interesting to
ask. When are two expressions in
this is like, DSLR this a p I is the same,
right? Right. And we're sort of used to this in everyday high school.
We say, like, f map dot f map is the same as one f
map, right? Um, but
very often, like very rarely. Do you see people
think about this for, like, the libraries they're writing?
Lesser. The category theory people
stuff. Um,
and so the claim is that, um, we can
think about equality for, like, very mundane
sorts of tasks, right? Like very mundane. Like
real world applications that you're writing. Um,
they should have qualities as well. And,
um so So there's a few things that come from
that right, one of which is, if you have these
equalities, then of course, you can turn them into property tests and
then, as you like wicked amounts of
of just test coverage, right? For every property test, you can generate
arbitrary many unit tests. Um,
and so that's that's exciting. But the other thing is, what it does
is it constrains the implementation, right?
Um, there's going to be sort of infinite many ways of
implementing a program such that all of these
equalities hold. But often, if you like,
chase the equalities, you can find different ways of
representing programs. And so you can. You
can use the equalities as a tool for, as an
implementer to say, like I know that these two things are
equivalent, but one of them is maybe faster. So
I'm going to choose that as my sort of basis,
um, and then use the inequalities to rewrite
all the things that user rights in a language that's, um,
useful to them or make sense to them in a way that
is equivalent but faster,
>> Right? That sounds to me how to do that.
That sounds to me like something that is very appealing to
programmers, especially I feel like this comes up a lot
in list programming where people want
a very small kernel of
primitives and then build everything out of that and
it sounds like algebra driven. Design is trying to find,
uh, maybe in kind of a roundabout way,
find those primitives such that they meet all these
properties and then you can shuffle them around behind the scenes to get a good
implementation.
>> Yeah, I think so. I think that's a very good way of raising it. Um, one
thing I'd like to stress is just that the implementation doesn't need to be at all
based on the colonel's right. The kernels are for the
user. But for the implementation, you can have all sorts of crazy
like, um, specialist primitives that
make no sense in user land. That's okay, because they're
fast as long as you can prove the equality. It's
fine.
>> And I think this ties in with something else. You said from the
book about abstraction, where
programmers often think about abstraction as like
hiding implementation details. And it does do that.
But, uh, it seems to be more powerful
when you're abstraction is based on this algebra, so that
you know, your abstraction can't leak because the
entire, like the rules of the thing are based on the
algebra you built. So the implementation
kind of, by definition does not matter.
>> Yeah. Yeah, that's it. Absolutely. I
think too many people think about abstractions like, Oh,
I'll put it in a module.
I'll put it behind a data
type right? Or I'll pull out this
implementation to its own function. It's like That's
not There's a quote from Dexter I really like, which is
that abstraction is not about being vague,
but a about creating a new semantic level. I wish you can be
absolutely precise, right?
>> Yeah. So, yeah, I, like I
mentioned earlier, have not made it entirely through this book yet, but I'm
really enjoying it so far. And it feels like it'll give me
some tools for approaching problems,
particularly, um,
taking the time before diving
into implementation, to think about the problem and kind of push on
the boundaries of it and see where it can be broken down into simpler
pieces, which is something that I've already
seen in the examples that you give where
you talk about like you can come up with a property, and it may be very
complicated. And that suggests that you
may have multiple things kind of mixed together there or
complected to borrow the you know, the rich hickey. Speak there.
Um and you would do well to pull those
apart. And then in doing so, you might discover more
properties about your program, or you might discover a simple, simpler way to
implement it or, you know, any number of things.
So looking forward to continuing to explore that
>> Yeah, well, I think it's a great book, and I strongly
recommend it might
>> just be a little bit biased. But I agree
with you.
Um, but yeah, that's not the only book you've
written, right? You previously wrote another book called
Thinking With Types. What is that one about?
>> That one is about all the all the wonky
stuff you need to do in order to do type level programming.
Haskell. Right. Um, it's sort of
unfortunate that such a book is necessary, right?
Because if you look at languages like Magda
or um Cocker, like properly dependent type
languages, there is no type level
programming. It's just programming in Haskell.
It's sort of ridiculous. that we have this like strange kind,
where it's sort of a tuple, but it's not
really, but it's like a set of constraints. But it's not data
dot set right, and it's like,
Why does this exist? Right? So,
um so thinking what types of sort of a
collection of all the folk floor that has existed
about how to do independently type stuff,
like type level programming more, more generally,
um, without sort of needing to go through
and find all the resources for
yourself?
>> Yeah. Uh, I often we have turned
recently into using more servant the
http API library, which is very
much implemented at the type level. And it definitely
highlights some of the I don't
know sharp edges on dealing with this type level of
programming in high school, because you have to leave the very
comfortable value level programming world and deal with
this entirely different world, which is kind of disorienting.
>> It's the same, but it's different
annoyingly,
yeah,
>> and there's all new terminology to worry about. You know, you got type flame
movies and data and, like
just I want to deal with functions and you know, the stuff that I know,
>> right? Yeah. It's definitely a mind bender to some
degree. Um, you know, as someone
who's not as experienced in
high school, like walking into type
families and type level programming,
Definitely. I mean, it's been insightful and fun to
learn, but it definitely took Took a
minute. So, um, you know, I appreciate you taking the
time to gather some
helpful resources for that.
Uh, that way you aren't bouncing
>> around all over the Internet to figure out what do I do? What
>> type? Families. How does this work?
>> As an experienced Haskell? Er doesn't make my
brain bend any less.
It's just weird. And like
every single time, I need to re page all these arcane
rules for how to do it. And as
I get older and wiser, I sort of the more I
feel like maybe this is a bad approach.
And, like, maybe we just shouldn't be doing these things
except in very, very small.
>> Yeah, So do you feel like we should
be pushing toward dependent? We typed
languages, or we should be pushing toward
more, give up on the type level programming and
focus on the value level stuff.
>> Um, I think either of those would be okay,
>> but we're kind of in the middle right now, and that's the problem.
>> I don't know what the dependent Haskell story is going to
look like, but I'm hoping it will just
work in the way that, like lean or
address, just
>> works.
>> Um, I hope it is. I
I want to believe, but based on what the current
type story is, I don't know if I feel
it yet. I've been internalized
>> it. Yeah, I haven't, uh, been
following the dependent Haskell threat. I haven't
played with really any independent dependent. We typed languages. I'm
aware of address. And every time I see,
uh, tweet pop up with and I'm like, man, that looks pretty cool. I should
check it out sometime. Um,
but, uh, yeah, I'm not hopeful
that Haskell, as a language and community, will be able
to shift from not being dependent. We typed to be independently
typed. It seems like too much of a change, but,
you know, maybe it will happen. And I think with linear
types, that's a that's a similar type of change.
And maybe if that one goes really well, that could bode well
for also doing dependent types.
>> Yeah, is your concern that there's too much
baggage or too much like ego
or, um, or just like, maybe the implementation won't be what we
want or
>> I would be afraid of baggage. Like we have
so many things. As bad as the
type level programming situation is now,
um, people are at
least familiar with it. You know, it's close
at hand to continue borrowing rich
Yogi ISMs. Um, and if we say
Okay, well, all that is gone now, and it's replaced with this thing.
That is better. But you have to relearn everything.
Maybe that'll be too much and people will give up. Or
maybe it'll be great and everyone will jump ship. But I don't know.
>> The dream of
dependent types is that it works just like values. And so there is
nothing to learn,
>> right? But if you're already
familiar with the Singleton's library or like servant would have to
be, I assume completely rewritten.
And maybe the
>> good thing I think servants an amazing piece of engineering. But I wish it
didn't exist.
>> Yeah, I think I agree with you. I really enjoy using
it and everything that it gets us, but it's beautiful
>> when it works well. And when it doesn't, you get these type tornadoes.
Yeah, five pages all the way
across several times.
>> People like to give JavaScript a hard time for, like, the
nested callback thing. But those servant type errors
are much worse.
>> It's amazing when it works, it's so
fantastic. And if you can follow the happy path,
it's great. Unfortunately, I find I'm not good at
following Happy Path. Often
>> we try to stay on it. I heard someone I wish
I could remember who. But I heard them say that, like, the best thing
to do as a programmer is just don't do weird
stuff. And the hard part is figuring out what the weird stuff
is. So with servants, as long as you stay on the
straight and narrow, then it works great. But otherwise I'd like
that.
But yeah, I don't think we're going to get to the answer today
of is dependent type Haskell going to work or not, But
I'm just I feel like if there's enough
work involved with the switch over, then it's going to be a
hard sell versus oh well,
I'll switch to address or I'll switch to you know what other other
language?
>> Yeah, Haskell has the advantage in that. We have
users. All
these other languages are really cool, but nobody Nobody,
really outside of the core group of researchers. And
like some academics, as far as I can tell, really use these
things. Um And so I think it would be hard
to I think Haskell has momentum, and I think it's probably
past the the I think it will exist
forever.
>> Right, Uh,
>> in one way, in one way or another. Right. Um,
so I I think that's promising. And,
um, I'm really curious to see how they
deprecate the old stuff for when dependent type
Haskell happens, right? Do you still support all the
weird type family stuff? I guess you have
to, but I think they would. Weird semantics, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, given how G.H.C. in
particular support stuff now,
um, it seems like they would support it for quite a
while. You know,
>> that's a very good point that that actually scares me more
than
>> yeah. G.H.C. seems to be very,
um, and probably for the best, but they seem to be very
hesitant to deprecate anything and get rid of anything.
>> I mean, it's amazing if you're a user
of G.H.C., it's less so if you are, like a
revolutionary and want to change the language,
so I understand why they do it,
But I wish they wouldn't, But I don't
know if it weren't
there, I would miss it, I guess, is what I'm trying to
>> say. Yeah.
Um, so, yeah. Thanks for explaining thinking
with types to us. It sounds like both came and I could do well to
read it and maybe understand what we're doing. The servant a little better.
I think it would
>> probably help if if you're just sort of bashing your head against the
wall, So why doesn't Why doesn't this work? Where's that come
>> from?
Um, yeah, I'd like to, uh, shift gears a little
bit and talk about your probably semi library, which
maybe is a little old hat by now, but
yeah, tell us about it. What is it? Why people may want to use
it.
>> Yeah, um, so plus me
is Freeman adds, um,
done better, I guess, is how I would phrase it,
um and so the idea is sort of you can
abstract away from a specific Menad stack
like Mona Transformer thing. And instead you can
say I have these effects and
companies effects can be like, really fine tune because they like, I have a
connection to an FTP client
FTP server or I have, like, um,
I have the ability to read and write to some data source
That is a key value source state fully. But I don't
care what that is. Maybe that's, uh
So, um so the idea is sort
of you can separate your business logic, which is I have
some abstractions I care about from the actual implementations of those
things. Um, that's the cell at the high
level, and I guess of all of
all effects systems. And, uh, and
then later you can choose how to interpret those
systems. And so I can say, Oh, I have this this key
value store and, like, maybe that's read this. Or maybe
that is http requests. Or maybe it's a local
file, right? Or maybe it's just a local statement. Add,
um, the application
shouldn't care,
>> right? You only care about the interface that it exposes.
>> Yeah, exactly like and so the pitch is sort of like,
what did the business people care about? Can we express
that in 10 lines of code, right. And
generally, if you're at a high enough high enough level of abstraction,
the answer is yes. Um, and and that's really
lovely, right? When you get to a point where all of your business
logic is comprehensible and then
you sort of transform it through these
transformations of I have this one effect, I
can implement it either directly. Or I can say
I can implement in terms of other effects. And so I can
say I can implement this state, but only if I've
got access to a Web client, right?
Um, but then that Web client you might also want to mock.
And so it's not actually talking to the Web.
Right? So So that's sort of the the idea. Um,
polygamy. What it brings to the table is, makes it
much easier to do these sorts of things. Um,
>> easier than what?
>> Easier than, uh, there's
another library called like, free or simple, and
for your effects and freer. And,
uh, there's, like 20 different Fremont libraries in
various states of love.
Really?
Um, and the idea
for this was I wanted it to be, um,
easy and fast and give good
error messages if you screwed something up and
so that those were the goals. And, um, the last
one, in particular, was quite challenging. Uh, it
requires, like it requires a plug in to
run, which, in retrospect, was a bad idea,
because it means you just have to keep that up to date with
G.H.C. versions in a way that, like a library, doesn't need to
be.
>> Wait, so it requires a plug in in order to
work at all, or in order to get, doesn't
>> know, not in order to work at all, but in order to, um,
to get type in France working. There's
a lot of programs you'll write in polygamy that without
the plug in, you'll say, Obviously, this is what I want
and do like Whoa, I don't know what this effect is like. There's only one
effect. There is clearly that one, but
it doesn't know. And so there's a There's a plug in that,
like solves those. So it's sort of a type
checker addition. Cool.
>> Yeah. Um, but yeah, uh, I can
appreciate that keeping up with the G.H.C. A p I is
a little tedious. Um, we were just talking about how good they
are, maintaining backwards compatibility. That's for their, you
know, the compiler and everything. Not for the internals,
which shift around much more often.
>> Right on the on the other hand, like I appreciate
I wish there were a better
compatibility story, though there is, like the G.H.C. lived
now, which I think solves
this problem I've never really worked against. I think it's newer
than my issues, But
>> yeah, there is the G.H.C. library for, like,
parsing right that Shane
Fletcher, I think maintains,
um and yeah, that seems really nice to say, like, Okay, I don't
really use all the particulars, or I can do
a pretty straightforward mapping between all the versions, and he
has done that for you.
>> That one, unfortunately, doesn't work if you also need
G.H.C. the library.
Because the parcel has just redefined all the
types of needs, which is lovely. Except when
you now want to talk back to G.H.C. is like, Oh, my expression is
not the same as your expression, even though it's identical,
>> right? That's unfortunate. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So um, I think it's it's much better state of
affairs than the whole source extensions.
Situation was, Yeah, but I haven't had
the joy of working with it yet.
>> Yeah, I will say that it's
nice to have the option of writing these plug
ins, you know, and I think that, uh, there are
a couple kind of big name ones, I guess
I can only really think of one. The record pre processor has kind of like a
preview of, like, extensions to come. Um,
but interesting to see them used here for an effect library as well.
>> Yeah. Um I think these days I
don't really endorse Freeman. It's
okay. Alexis. Alexis
king wrote an article. Maybe this year, maybe last year. It's hard to
keep track
>> of Time is a flat circle.
>> Yeah. Yes, um, talking about how all of my
claims for performance were
untrue. And, um,
she was absolutely right about that. And then eventually
unintentionally untrue. Right? And I wasn't going on my way to lie
about it, but some issues sort of in the
benchmarking and how the simple fireworks, and just like, there
were several systematic errors that led to my
performance claims being untrue.
Um, so that was part of it. And then, um,
the good news, I guess, Or bad news depending on how you look at is
that sort of all effects systems have terrible performance,
including MTL, and nobody noticed
because everybody's bad at benchmarking.
>> It's hard.
Yeah,
>> it's not to say like mtl is as bad as plus me. But
so on one hand, like I claimed, the performance doesn't really matter. For most of the
things we write write most of the time you're waiting on a network
call or or you know, I or something so
usually doesn't matter. But it would still be nice to get that right.
And on the other hand, um, the thing is, I
realized I think we're all
better off just sort of like writing pure
programs. If you just push all the effects
as far out as possible. That's just a
better solution in general. Yeah. Are you
familiar with this? Actually has a lot of good articles on how to do
this.
>> The three layer Haskell cake, I think, is
>> one. Um, that one I'm not as fond
of. He's got one called Invert your mocks. There
you go. And that one is sort of all about how to pull
out the pure parts of effective programs. And I really endorse
that.
>> And I think, uh, there's some
I'm drawn to that approach of
designing software because it extends outside of
Haskell as well. If you're familiar with Gary Bernhardt, he has
to talk about, um What is it?
Imperative Shell. Pure core. It may not be the
exact wording, but yeah, push everything to the outside and then on
the inside. You've already done all the network, all the
database, all that, and you just deal with the pure stuff.
>> Unfortunately, humans seem bad at writing code like that.
Especially when, like time pressure arises. And it's like, Oh, I just
need io here. I can't be fucked to do it the right way.
Right. Um and then over time, that stuff
accumulates and sort of I think that was really what I was rallying
against with. Plus, me was, um I had
worked in, like, a pretty atrocious code base
professionally, which just the entire thing was in
Ohio and there was no sort
of discipline anywhere about what things were appearing.
So just like we We
found a multimillion dollar bug that bit us
because we just couldn't test anything because it was all an I O.
>> Yes, that's pretty bad. So I can see why that would
motivate you.
>> Yeah, the problem is sort of motivation, like these
are only ever after the fact. Right?
Nobody really cares if you say, Hey, everything is an i o.
And it's going to cause us millions of dollars, but
it doesn't work until it happens. Right? So
>> and then when it happens, you get the the peanut
gallery on Reddit saying, like, you could have you could have got this
>> Exactly. Yeah. Um,
So yeah. So I think it was It was a really
interesting project for me to just go through and learn how to
do all of this stuff and really flex my type level
muscles.
>> Lots of type of programming in there.
>> Yeah, exactly. Um and I'm happy that it's taken
off, um, in a way that I didn't
expect. Um I think
that's exciting to me. And also a little scary.
>> Scary how
people
>> are using yourself out there. Not because how I
would like to write programs anymore. I
think I've learned something now that I hadn't learned
back then. And so people using that sort of
reflects, like either I'm wrong
now or their right,
>> neither of which is a good place to be. Yeah,
>> exactly. And so I'm not sure what the answer is,
but anyway, so I'm happy people use
it. I'm happy I get the credit for it.
Uh, you know, there's worse
things in the world than people using your software.
>> Yeah, I'm curious. We were talking earlier
about dependency type programs and
how you know, Haskell is kind of halfway there, and it's
awkward. Um, I have a passing
familiarity with peer script, which has sort of an effect system
baked in thanks to the road types. Uh,
do you have any experience with that? And how does it kind of stack up against
the Fremont ads?
>> I don't have really any experience with you know what
existed. And then they sort of chopped out of I O
yeah. Kept the prototypes, and I don't I don't know anything more than
that.
>> Yeah, I think again, I only have a passing
familiarity. So apologies to anyone in the peer script community. If I get this
way wrong, but, uh, from what I recall, they
had, um, or they have road types
so they can do, like, anonymous records. And those also
exist at the type level. So you can have an
anonymous map of
named things too. I think they just
call them effects. So you'd have, like, some kind that
represented I can talk to the database and
you're function and say, Okay, I need this effect in order to work, and
I think they don't do that anymore. You can if
you want to, but officially, they effectively just
have Io as their effect.
Um, so is, uh, interesting for me to see,
like, Okay, they have all this power. They can express all this stuff at the type level,
and they kind of don't want to, um and they'll
go back to doing things the way they Haskell does it.
>> Yeah, I don't know why. Maybe
Maybe they've tried and given to go and realized it
doesn't work. Um, maybe, just like Haskell
has the prestige. And there's this
weird Mona thing where once you realize what you learn about money,
you need to write about them. And, like,
I think that is a big problem.
I don't know if that's relevant here, but I think I could see that happening where,
like someone says, Oh, Mona Transformers Let's use those because
Haskell uses those, Um,
again. I don't know anything about your scripts, and that's the sentiment they have.
But
>> so, uh, to try to shove these pieces
together. I think one of the problems that peer script ran into was
that, um if
your effect kind like
the thing that says, Hey, I need to be able to talk to or right to the
counselor read from it or whatever. If that
isn't shared among every library
that you're working with, then you get this very strange fracturing
where you have, let's say, two different Reedus
libraries, and they each define their own
effect. And so if you have one and you want to use the
other, suddenly you have to redo all of the effects all the way
up your chain because you have both of them. Now,
Um, and I feel like Haskell also
can have this problem where, like, you know, if
some fundamental type isn't defined low enough, Then everybody
defines their own, and it becomes a zoo. Um,
and maybe that's just way more annoying to deal
with when you're at the effect level.
>> I think that's true. Um, I'm hoping that people
don't I guess that's one of the things I like to
post me was sort of the high level idea of, like, I just
have some key value state. Right? Um, the thing
about if you have, like a red, this effect is that the only
implementation of that can be read us. There's
you can't do anything other than, like reddish or re
implementing lettuce.
You can try.
You could try, but at that point why, right? Um
and so I think there's a value
in keeping your effects as small as possible exactly for
this reason, regardless of the system or if it's just
MTL, or even if it's just like making a
moan and stack concrete on a stack of just
keeping your effects as small as possible, because
otherwise you're making choices
that you're going to have to live with, right?
Um, and unfortunately, like you have to make choices
at some point. But again, if you can push them as far out as
possible.
>> Yeah, I I
agree with you, but I'm not surprised to hear you say that Based on
algebra different design. Because it's like, you know, if
your interfaces I am reading this, then
it's really hard to come up with properties about that to market, to do
anything. But if your face is I'm a key value store
much easier.
>> Exactly. Yeah. What are the properties of lettuce?
Mhm. I don't know if there are any
right guaranteed to get back what you put in.
Yeah.
>> Uh, yeah.
Um, well, we've covered a lot of good topics
here. Uh, Sandy, is there anything else you know? What
are you working on? What are you looking forward to? What's next for you?
>> Yeah. So right now I'm working full time on
high school. Wingman. Wingman, try Haskell. Um,
the branding is still being fixed up
in the air. Yeah, exactly. Um and so
I'm trying to make that, like, my full time life.
Um and so I've got a patreon for that. If if
anyone is interested in helping support me through that,
>> for sure we'll leave. That sort of linked to that in the show
notes.
>> Marvelous. Thank you. Um, that's like where all my
time's going and putting, like, 10 hours a day into it right now.
And so, uh, yeah, besides that,
um, I think that's it. Really
like, that's all I'm doing. It feels good.
Honestly, it's not like a project you really care
about.
>> Yeah, And if people want to find you online, where should
they go look for you?
>> Yeah, I'm I'm online at reasonably
polymorphic dot com is my math blog, and I also
have sandy McGuire dot me, which is my personal
blog, and it turns out like I'm going to show them
both, but there's really no market for like, there's no
intersection of people care about both of those things.
People care about my math stuff or they care
about me as a person. But
I learned that the hard way. I need to split them up, but I'll show
them both, and I think that's that's pretty
much all of my online presence.
>> All right. Yeah. Thank you
so much for being on the show with us today. It's been great to have
you here. And my
>> pleasure. Thanks for having me. And I just want to thank you both for, like, all the
great things you've been doing for the community.
>> Thanks. I appreciate it.
>> Can you keep on keeping on?
>> Yeah, like that. Cheers.
Please
>> do,
>> uh, and thank you to the listeners of the high
school weekly podcast. Um, thanks for tuning in. Even though
we're not here every week, we're here. Most weeks,
uh, I've been your
host, Taylor Fausak, and our special guest this week was
Sandy McGuire. Also with me today was Cameron
Gara. If you want to find out more about Haskell
Weekly, you can visit our website, which is Haskell
weekly dot news. If you like the show,
please rate and review us on apple
podcasts. Uh, and if you have any feedback, you can
tweet it at us. Our handle is at
Haskell Weekly. Um, and, yeah, we're
elsewhere on the web. But those are the mainland's.
>> Yep. And Haskell Weekly is brought to you by I.T. Pro
T.V. an A C I learning company and our
employer. They would like to offer you 30%
off your subscription by using promo
code Haskell Weekly 30 at
checkout. Um, so if you're ever interested in
I.T. cybersecurity training, you know
we have anything and everything you need. So
check it out if you're interested. But I think that about does it
for us. Taylor and Sandy? Yeah,
>> sure does. So thanks for joining us. And we'll see you
next week.
>> Peace.